As we prepare for a fresh start in 2022, it’s worth taking stock of the year that was and how to grow your business in the future. Businesses need to seek new and effective strategies to thrive in this challenging economic climate – and Nedbank provides beyond banking services to support small businesses in their journey. Nedbank’s Regional Manager for Small Business Services and Private Clients for the Western Cape, Ashrinee Gopi, says that Nedbank offers tailored small-business banking accounts for each business owner’s unique needs. ‘For example, our Startup Bundle is tailored for sole business owners with a turnover of less than R3 million a year and offers zero monthly service fees for the first six months, as well as up to 20 free transactions, eNotes and more. And because clients’ business and personal finances are so interdependent, Nedbank has designed fit-for-purpose banking solutions that enable clients to manage both through a single point of contact: a dedicated relationship banker.’ However, it’s Nedbank’s support of small businesses beyond affordable banking that is helping to rebuild this vital sector of the economy, and Gopi says that Nedbank has a host of always-on value-added services to get and keep small businesses going. ‘Our Essential Guide for Small-business Owners is a valuable tool that offers expert discussions and helpful tips for start-up and small-business owners to learn more about what it takes to start and run a business, and the Avo business-to-business marketplace by Nedbank was developed to enable businesses, both big and small, to connect securely and grow our economy.  Whether your business is looking for additional means to distribute its products, or for more effective and efficient ways to source raw material or stock, the digital marketplace connects businesses with other like-minded businesses, anywhere in South Africa, anytime, regardless of the sector.’ Perhaps the most important resource for entrepreneurs is Nedbank’s networking platform, SimplyBiz.co.za, a free-to-join one-stop-shop for all entrepreneurs, whether they’re Nedbank clients or not and provides access to all solutions to start, run, grow, wind-down or restart their enterprise/legacy as a business owner. In short, SimplyBiz offers small business the following incredible benefits: For more useful tips on how to help your small business thrive in 2022, read our article on five ways to grow your small business in 2022 on our blog. And to find out more about how Nedbank can help you achieve your small-business financial aspirations, please contact Ashrinee Gopi on AshrineeG@Nedbank.co.za or send an email to smallbusinessservices@nedbank.co.za.