Today's retirees are faced with a number of options for their senior living years, but the only one really worth considering is a continuing care retirement community (CCRC).  This, says Barry Kaganson, chief executive of Auria Senior Living, is the most modern and comprehensive living option for seniors. CCRCs are communities that offer a full continuum of senior care – ranging from independent living to assisted living, memory care and frail care, within one environment that ensures independence and quality of life.  And, inspired by global best practice, Auria develops, owns and manages a portfolio of CCRCs in South Africa. The traditional concept of a “retirement village ” or “old-age home ”, Kaganson says, is not appealing to today’s older adults.   “Modern senior living communities are attractive places where older adults – retired or not – can still enjoy an unrestricted quality of life, in an engaging environment with hospitality and lifestyle services, which is supportive of their changing needs.” The advantage of a CCRC is residents can move in as fully independent and can enjoy all the lifestyle amenities and extensive activities on offer. Should their needs change, they have all the assistance they require without having to relocate again. Such communities, he adds, offer life enhancements for older adults on a daily basis. “They offer the opportunity to connect with other residents, staff and even volunteers. Group activities , such as clubs, outings and socials promote much-needed social interaction and opportunities to exercise.” Recent years have seen a growth in the trendt owards relocating to places which offer a more relaxed lifestyle and many parts of the Western Cape are proving attractive to people at all stages of life looking to semigrate. With this in mind, Auria recently acquired Woodside Village in Rondebosch and has embarked on an extensive upgrade and redevelopment process to bring it in line with the quality of other communities int he group’s portfolio Through the implementation of international best practice and a rigorous commitment to ensuring residents enjoy their best quality oflife, every single day, Auria  has received both international and local recognition, Kaganson says.The communities of San Sereno and Melrose Manor in Gauteng have won numerous international awards. Woodside will offer approximately 210 residential units set on a 9-hectare property. The communal areas will comprise a state-of-the-art wellness centre, a cinema, a restaurant and a coffee shop, among others. “We are excited to have the opportunity to bring exceptional quality of life and a strong sense of community to Woodside. Our aim in developing every senior living community is to make it a living destination of choice – somewhere that people of any age would want to live for its high-quality lifestyle and amenities. ” The waiting list for Woodside is already extensive, proving there is no shortage of demand. “We believe that our later years should be defined by choice and not by compromise. “Senior living communities can provide great peace of mind for residents and their families alike, and should be a first choice, rather than a default option.” He says gold-standard CCRCs internationally have demonstrated that, with the correct balance of assistance and independence, seniors can continue to live an enhanced and high-quality life.