Russia's President Vladimir Putin defied mounting sanctions and recriminations from the West as the country’s military pushed deeper into Ukraine on Thursday, attacking strategic airfields and advancing toward major cities. According to reports, Russian forces reached the outskirts of Kyiv on Friday as Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky said the invading troops were targeting civilians and explosions could be heard in the besieged capital. Pre-dawn blasts in Kyiv set off a second day of violence and displaced at least 100,000 people. –  Ukrainian men are getting armed and ready to defend their land.#SlavaUkraini pic.twitter.com/KNfjahYF4N Russia seizes lots of Western weapons in Ukraine: Russian defence ministry Russia's special military operation in Ukraine has seized a large quantity of weapons supplied by Western countries in recent months, said Defence Ministry Spokesman Igor Konashenkov on Friday. The seized weapons include the U.S. Javelin anti-tank missile systems and British NLAWs, the spokesman said. Read more here. Ukraine is going to formally honor a group of Ukrainian border guards who died this week defending Snake Island, a small Ukrainian maritime territory in the Black Sea. The soldiers were bombed by a Russian warship, according to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. pic.twitter.com/MfQ4ir49yQ –  Biden Tasks US State Dept. to Allocate US$600Mln, Including US$350Mln for Defence, to Ukraine US President Joe Biden has tasked the Department of State to allocate US$600 million to Ukraine, including US$350 million for defence purposes, the White House said. Read more here. –  Russia to restrict Facebook access for 'censoring' its media Moscow said on Friday it was partially limiting access to Meta Platforms Inc's Facebook, accusing it of censoring Russian media, announcing the measure a day after Russia invaded Ukraine and the latest in a series of steps against U.S. social media giants. Read more here. –  S&P cuts Russia's rating to junk, Moody's issues junk  warning https://t.co/asxHZsy0YY pic.twitter.com/ntHB1Bd6fM –  Indians in Ukraine advised not to move to border posts In a latest advisory by the Indian Embassy in Ukraine, Indian citizens in the war-torn country were on Saturday advised not to move to any of the border posts without prior coordination with the Indian government. "All Indian Citizens in Ukraine are advised to not move to any of the border posts without prior coordination with Government of India officials at the border posts (helpline numbers established) and the Emergency numbers of Embassy of India, Kyiv," the advisory read. Read more here. –  "All of us are here protecting our independence of our country."Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskiy shows his people he remains in the country's capital, Kyiv, as Russian forces approach the city. pic.twitter.com/i0ZylY7nkE –  Ask for forgiveness from Putin and apologise: Chechnya strongman Kadyrov 'advises' Ukraine President Chechen strongman and leader Ramzan Kadyrov has "advised" Ukrainian President Zelensky "to call Vladimir Putin and apologize", RT reported. In a speech he gave to the assembled servicemen in central Grozny in Chechnya, Kadyrov demanded that Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky apologize to Putin. "Taking this opportunity, I want to give advice to the current President Zelensky so that he calls our President, Supreme Commander Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, and apologizes for not doing so sooner. Do it in order to save Ukraine. Ask for forgiveness and agree to all the conditions that Russia puts forward. This will be the most correct and patriotic step for him," the leader declared, RT reported. Read more here. –  In a video put out at about midnight Kyiv time, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky told his country’s soldiers: "Tonight they will storm. We all need to understand what awaits us. We have to persevere tonight. The fate of Ukraine is being decided right now." pic.twitter.com/rnVBlYKXMn –  Roundup: Russia continues to hit Ukraine targets, with Moscow-Kyiv talks expected Moscow continued to exert hefty pressure on Kyiv by striking more military targets in Ukraine, while the two sides have expressed intention to start direct dialogue. The Russian armed forces have disabled 211 military infrastructure facilities in Ukraine since the operation began on early Thursday, Russian Defence Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov said on Friday night, up from 118 facilities reported in his morning briefing. Read more here. –  Archbishop Makgoba calls for indaba over Ukraine war, backs Pope's appeal Anglican Archbishop Thabo Makgoba of Cape Town has called for a high-level peace initiative in the form of "indaba" to de-escalate the crisis in Ukraine. He has also supported the appeal of Pope Francis for prayer and fasting on Ash Wednesday, March 2. Makgoba is in New York to attend the Institution of the Reverend Phil Jackson, the new Rector of Trinity Church Wall Street, the original Anglican parish on the island of Manhattan. Read more here. –  President Cyril Ramaphosa calls for UN to step in and intervene in Ukraine conflict President Cyril Ramaphosa has called for the intervention of the UN Security Council in the conflict in Ukraine, saying it was not necessary for people to be killed when there was an option of engagement. Ramaphosa told a litigation forum on Friday that the UN had to intervene to stop the war in the Ukraine. Read more here. –