Cape Town - As Valentine’s Day is celebrated, Hyprop Investments has named three Cape Town children the heroes of its This is Love campaign. Hyprop Investments is celebrating all forms of love all this month and has named nine-year-old Alex Davids, Thorne Davids, 10, and Matthew Hahn, 11, from Parkwood are its heroes after they helped their puppy who was attacked by another dog and then knocked by a vehicle as it tried fleeing. The children carried their wounded furry friend to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) in Grassy Park. The trio used a stretcher-like object at their disposal, a baby chair. They walked 2km from their home to the Cape of Good Hope SPCA with the injured pup Bruno, safely tucked in the stretcher. The children shared the load in carrying their fur friend by crab walking and shuffling the distance to get help. Once through the animal hospital doors and once Bruno’s injuries were assessed, only then did the young dog owner, Thorne, break down and cry. Christie Stanbridge, Brand and Campaigns Marketing Manager at Hyprop, said the example of caring and love for another by the children really touched their hearts. “That’s why they are our This is Love Hyprop Heroes, and we will be contributing to Bruno’s care and treating the children to an awesome day out at any of our shopping centres.  They are a great example of love and deserve to be recognised for their genuine act of kindness and affection,” Stanbridge said. She also thanked radio personality Carl Wastie for highlighting and getting the company involved to reward the children for their selfless act. Spokesperson for the Cape of Good Hope SPCA Belinda Abraham said this story is very special and said the children deserved to be made to feel like the heroes they are. “I do believe that acknowledging them for their good deed will reinforce their compassion for animals and that they will carry that into adulthood, regardless of whatever else they may deal with. “It’s well documented that children who have compassion for animals are less likely to become involved in acts of violence when they reach adulthood. “To preserve this compassion and care for a life form different to their own is to preserve their kind hearts for the future,” Abraham added. robin.francke@inl.co.za IOL