After a series of threats by President Vladimir Putin, Russia invaded Ukraine on Thursday.  US President Joe Biden is set to meet with his Group of Seven (G7) allies on Thursday to map out more severe measures against Russia after Putin launched what Biden called "a premeditated war" against Ukraine, according to media reports. –  NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg has condemned Russia's "cold-blooded"' invasion of Ukraine and said the alliance would take new deterrence and defence steps including putting over 100 warplanes on high alert and further increase the presence of troops in eastern Europe.  🎥  France24 –  Russia's 'brazen' attack on Ukraine 'will not go unpunished' Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau on Thursday condemned Russia's "egregious" and "unprovoked" attack on Ukraine, calling on Moscow to immediately withdraw from the country and saying its aggression "will not go unpunished." "Canada condemns in the strongest possible terms Russia's egregious attack on Ukraine," Trudeau said in a statement issued in the hours after Russian President Vladimir Putin announced the start of military operations. Read the full story here. – This is why it seems like Russia and Putin are willing to risk war over Ukraine... and it might not be for the reason you think: pic.twitter.com/nPhBzkypH4 –  Despite sanctions, UK accused of swimming in 'dirty Russian money' As Prime Minister Boris Johnson moves to confront Moscow over its Ukraine invasion, he stands accused of leaving the financial back door wide open by ignoring a "sewer" of Russian money coursing through Britain. Johnson on Wednesday confirmed another delay to an "economic crime" bill, which he says will eventually dismantle the "Matryoshka doll" hiding the ownership of UK companies and properties by Russian oligarchs. Read the full story here. –  Bloodshed and tears as eastern Ukraine faces Russian attack A son wept over the body of his father among the wreckage of a missile strike in a residential district in the eastern Ukrainian town of Chuguiv as the country woke up Thursday to Russian invasion. "I told him to leave," the man in his 30s sobbed, next to the twisted ruins of a car. Read the full story here. –  NATO Deploys Additional Forces on Eastern Flank NATO is deploying additional defensive forces eastward in connection with the situation in Ukraine and considers Russia's actions as a threat to Euro-Atlantic security, the alliance’s council said on Thursday. Read the full story here. –  Ukrainians fleeing over the border in Poland on Thursday (February 24) described the situation as "total war" after Russia invaded Ukraine.  🎥  Reuters –  Israel condemns Russian attack on Ukraine Israel condemned Russian actions in Ukraine on Thursday and called on world powers to resolve the crisis swiftly. Russia's attack on Ukraine is a grave breach of international order. Israel condemns the attack, Foreign Minister Yair Lapid said in a televised statement. Read the full story here. –  Local residents on the scene of a shelled residential building in Chuguev, Ukraine, despair. Homes have been destroyed and a body lies on the ground under a blanket, as Russia launches a military attack and crosses over the Ukrainian border. VIDEO: AFP –  Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich banned from UK residence due to links with Russian government Chelsea Football Club’s Russian billionaire owner Roman Abramovich has been banned from living in Britain ever again, according to reports on Thursday. This comes after Russia’s full scale invasion of the Ukraine was also confirmed on Thursday. Read the full story here. – Russians bombed a civilian apartment complex in Chuhuiv, near Kharkiv pic.twitter.com/EXpvbwhRM5 –  WATCH: Explosions in Ukrainian cities Following Russian President Vladimir Putin's announcement on Russian state TV that he had authorised a military operation in eastern Ukraine, explosions were heard and seen in the breakaway city of Donetsk and the capital city of Kyiv. According to Asian News, Russian officials said it posed no threat to Ukrainian civilians as it carries out operations and that it will not target civilians. Read the full story here. –  Belarus says its army not taking part in Ukraine invasion Belarus's leader Alexander Lukashenko said Thursday that his military is not taking part in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, as Kyiv said Moscow's troops were entering the country from Belarusian territory. Our armed forces are not taking part in this operation, said Lukashenko, an ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin. Moscow has stationed tens of thousands of troops in Belarus. Read the full story here. –  During the second emergency UN Security Council session in three days, members of the Council plead with Russia to step back from war with Ukraine.  "President Putin, in the name of humanity, bring your troops back to Russia. In the name of humanity, do not allow to start in Europe what could be the worst war since the beginning of the century," says Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.  🎥  AFP –  Italy summons Russian envoy over Ukraine invasion Italy on Thursday summoned the Russian ambassador after the Kremlin launched an air and ground assault on Ukraine, which Rome slammed as an "unjustified and unprovoked aggression". Moscow's "extremely serious" attack on the former Soviet republic was "a clear and distinct violation of international law," Italy's foreign ministry said. –  EXPLAINER: This is why Russia is invading the Ukraine The world woke up to news of Russia's full-scale invasion of the Ukraine. This comes after a series of threats issued by Russian leader Vladimir Putin. Interfax Ukraine reported rocket attacks on military facilities throughout Ukraine and that Russian troops had landed in the southern port cities of Odessa and Mariupol. It also reported staff and passengers evacuating Kyiv's Boryspil International Airport. Read the full story here. –  'Unprovoked and unjustified': World reacts to attack on Ukraine World leaders on Thursday swiftly condemned Russia's military attack on Ukraine, with Western capitals vowing to escalate sanctions against Moscow while the head of the United Nations demanded the conflict end immediately. Key reactions: - US President Joe Biden — "The prayers of the entire world are with the people of Ukraine tonight as they suffer an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces," the US president said shortly after the operation began. He warned: "Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring." "The world will hold Russia accountable," he declared. Read the full story here. –  Russia rules out any threat to Ukrainian civilians during military action Russia has ruled out any threat to Ukrainian civilians as it carries out military operations in the country, local media reported. The Russian Defence Ministry has clarified that the Russian army is not carrying out any missile, aviation or artillery strikes on the cities of Ukraine and is not targeting civilians, Sputnik News reported. "Military infrastructure, air defence facilities, military airfields, aviation of the Armed Forces of Ukraine are being put out of action by [Russia's] high-precision means of destruction," the news agency quoted the ministry as saying. The ministry added that the military action does not threaten the Ukrainian civilian population. The ministry's remarks come after Russian President Vladimir Putin announced a special "military operation to protect Donbas" in eastern Ukraine. Read the full story here. –  –  To Ukrainians around the globe:Putin attacked, but no one is running away. Army, diplomats, everyone is working. Ukraine fights. Ukraine will defend itself. Ukraine will win. Share the truth about Putin’s invasion in your countries and call on governments to act immediately. –  –  US, G7 allies to meet after Putin launches ’premeditated war’ U.S. President Joe Biden will meet with his counterparts from the Group of Seven allies early Thursday to map out more severe measures against Russia after President Vladimir Putin launched what Biden called "a premeditated war" against Ukraine. Biden, who spoke with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy late on Wednesday, said the United States and its allies will respond in "a united and decisive way" to what he called "an unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces" on Ukraine. "President (Vladimir) Putin has chosen a premeditated war that will bring a catastrophic loss of life and human suffering," Biden said in a statement issued late on Wednesday. It came shortly after Putin told Russian state TV he had authorised a military operation in eastern Ukraine and explosions were heard in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv and the breakaway eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk. Read the full story here. –  Обстрел военного аэродрома в Краматорске#Краматорск #Война pic.twitter.com/EDi5zv56Ks –  Russia launches full-scale invasion of Ukraine, top official says Russia has launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine and is targeting cities with weapons strikes, Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said in a tweet on Thursday. Interfax Ukraine reported rocket attacks on military facilities throughout Ukraine and that Russian troops had landed in the southern port cities of Odessa and Mariupol. It also reported staff and passengers evacuating Kyiv's Boryspilairport. "Putin has just launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.Peaceful Ukrainian cities are under strikes," Kuleba said,referring to Russian President Vladimir Putin. "This is a war of aggression. Ukraine will defend itself and will win. The world can and must stop Putin. The time to act is now." Read the full story here.  IOL