After three or more years at a tertiary institution, recent graduates are often jumping to make their mark by joining the workplace. While it is possible to get a full-time job right out of university, companies often taking in graduates for internship positions. This unique opportunity allows you to work whilst also furthering your knowledge in your chosen field of work. You get hands-on experience and guidance that you will carry throughout your career. Here are some great internships you can apply for in Mpumalanga: Hospitality and tourism internship Company: SA Adventures Location: Hazyview Duration: 12 months Stipend: R3 500 Requirements:  N6 Hospitality Management N6 Tourism Management Application deadline: July 8, 2022 Apply here  Digital/social media marketing internship Company: SA Adventures Location: Hazyview Duration: 12 months Stipend: R4 500 Requirements:  Bachelor's Degree, preferably in Communications/English, Public Relations, Marketing, Journalism or Design, Political Science. A lower level of education will be considered based on passion for the industry. Application deadline: July 8, 2022 Apply here  Finance internship Company: Columbus Steel  Location: Middelburg Duration: 24 months Requirements:  Bachelor of Commerce in Accounting Application deadline: August 22, 2022 Apply here  Public administration internship Company: Za Wit (Pty) Ltd Location: Lydenburg Requirements: Relevant qualification in Public administration Apply here  Engineering internship Company: Columbus Steel  Location: Middelburg Duration: 24 months Requirements: Relevant qualification in Mechanical engineering Application deadline: August 22, 2022 Apply here  Law internship Company: Columbus Steel  Location: Middelburg Duration: 24 months Requirements: Bachelor of Laws (LLB) Application deadline: August 22, 2022 Apply here  Cybersecurity internship Company: Mitigate Security Services Location: Remote Stipend: R4500 basic per month, R500 cell, R500 internet, and R500 proficiency bonus. Requirements:  IT security knowledge. Matric High proficiency in English writing. Intelligence and diligence.  Apply here IOL BUSINESS