Sri Lankan parties to reach consensus, propose PM's name to Speaker on Friday Sri Lankan political parties after holding a discussion will reach a consensus and propose a name for the position of Prime Minister to the Speaker of the Parliament, local media reported. Sri Lankan MP from Colombo Harsha de Silva said that after holding a discussion a name for the position of Prime Minister will be proposed to the Parliament Speaker tomorrow at 10 am. Taking to Twitter, the MP wrote, "Responding to request by PM Ranil Wickremesinghe to the Sri Lankan Parliament Speaker to propose a name by consensus for PM, opposition parties will today discuss with various parties and groups in government to get such consensus. We will propose this name to Speaker at 10 am tomorrow." Meanwhile, the Sri Lankan Army soldiers are said to have been authorised to use the necessary force to prevent the destruction of property and life amid the ongoing protests in the Island nation in view of the severe economic and political crisis, Daily Mirror reported citing Army media. In another key development, the protesters who have been occupying the President's house in Colombo have now vacated the premises. (Source: Asian News International) –  Yellen says it's in China's interest to restructure Sri Lanka's debt China is a "very important" creditor of Sri Lanka and it would likely be in the interest of both countries if China participated in restructuring Sri Lanka's debt, US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said on Thursday. Yellen said she would urge other members of the Group of 20 major economies to put pressure on China to be more cooperative in long-stalled efforts to restructure the debts of countries in debt distress, including Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka owes at least $5 billion to China although some estimates put it at almost twice that amount. (Source: Reuters News) –  EXPLAINER: Why Sri Lanka PM declared a state of emergency.🎥 @FootballFaanFor more world news click here: https://t.co/MrQL87oPRW#WorldNews #SriLankaProtests pic.twitter.com/j66Oi1LdWt –  Sri Lanka: Gotabaya Rajapaksa to stay in Singapore, not travel to Middle East Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa and his wife will stay in Singapore and not travel further to the Middle East. According to various media reports, the Sri Lankan President and his wife, who took Saudia Airlines flight SV788 to Singapore, were expected to travel to Jeddah. Rajapaksa is expected to arrive in Singapore by 7pm today. Rajapaksa, his wife Ioma Rajapaksa, and two security officials were scheduled to board a Singapore Airlines flight last night from Male to Singapore but did not go ahead as scheduled due to security concerns. (Source: Asian News International) –  President’s resignation expected ‘before the end of Thursday’ According to Al Jazeera, officials at the speaker’s office said President Rajapaksa’s letter of resignation is expected to be delivered before the end of the day Thursday. The president is reported to be on his way to Singapore from Maldives.  –  One dead, 84 injured in Sri Lanka protests One person died and 84 others injured in anti-government protests in the Sri Lankan capital Colombo, media reports said. The 26-year-old man died from breathing difficulties after police lobbed teargas at protesters to disperse them, BBC reported. The injured included protesters who were outside the prime minister's office as well as those who were outside parliament later in the evening on Wednesday. The government has imposed a curfew in Colombo district from 12 noon on July 14 (Thursday) to 5 a.m. on July 15 (Friday). (Source: Indo-Asian News Service) –  –  Sri Lanka army says soldiers authorised to use necessary force to prevent destruction of property and life Sri Lankan soldiers had been authorised to use necessary force to prevent destruction of property and life, the country's army said in a statement on Thursday. (Source: Reuters News) –  Army tanks deployed near Sri Lankan Parliament as crisis worsens Sri Lanka Army deployed tanks near Parliament on Thursday to prevent protesters from entering the Parliament. Protesters stormed the Prime Minister's Office on Flower Road in Sri Lanka on Wednesday after clashes with army personnel. The island nation has been hit with a severe economic and political crisis. On 9 July, demonstrators forcibly entered the office of the President and the Prime Minister and its resident, and a fierce face-off between protesters and security forces was reported in Colombo. Angry protesters are demanding the immediate resignation of the President and the Prime Minister. (Source: Asian News International) –  UK advises against travel to Sri Lanka UK officials have advised against “all but essential travel” to Sri Lanka. The Foreign Commonwealth Office currently advises against all but essential travel to Sri Lanka, due to the current situation.See our travel advice: Sri Lanka travel advice - https://t.co/cxgzYCPU49 –  Zelensky hold Russia 'accountable' for ongoing catastrophe in Sri Lanka Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky blamed Russia for causing unrest in Sri Lanka as well as around the world due to the blocking of food products during the invasion of Ukraine. One of the major tactics Russia has used in their invasion of Ukraine is the creation of an “economic shock,” Zelensky said, adding that several countries experiencing food and fuel shortages due to the disruption in the supply chain have benefited Russia's agenda. Read more here. –  WATCH: Sri Lanka PM declares emergency as President Rajapaksa fled to Maldives Sri Lanka Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe on Wednesday declared an emergency and imposed a curfew in the western province of the country as protests intensified following President Gotabaya Rajapaksa's escape to the Maldives. A state of emergency was declared as protesters came prepared to face tear gas shelling by security forces deployed outside Wickremesinghe's residence. Air patrolling also began around the PM's residence. Read more here. –  Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, wife flees to Maldives President Gotabaya Rajapaksa and his wife along with two bodyguards travelled to the Maldives after full approval of the country's Defence Ministry, Sri Lanka officials confirmed on Wednesday. “An Air Force flight was given early in the morning on 13th July 2022 to depart,” Sri Lankan Air Force Media Director said in a statement. Rajapaksa landed at the Velana International Airport in the Maldives early Wednesday. Read more here. Related Video: