It looks like the South African Revenue Service (Sars) is gearing up for a major fight this week, following threats by the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) to mobilise members to shut down Sars after wage negotiations hit an impasse. According to a message on social media, Nehawu said the shutdown will commence on Tuesday, after rejecting a proposed wage increase of 1.39 percent. “On June 3, 2022 a meeting was convened with Sars to push the employer on improving its offer, however, that meeting did not yield any positive results. Instead, Sars made it categorically clear that the position tabled to Nehawu on May 29, 2022 has not changed and remains final,” a statement said.  “The national union has since then been consulting its members through convening membership meetings, shop steward councils in all workplaces of Sars which culminated to the national meeting held on Friday July 8, 2022 for a mandate on the way forward.” Nehawu said it has resolved the following: “Sars has left us with no option other than to mobilise our mass power and take our battle to the streets. This is the only power that we have as workers in fighting unfair conditions of work. We have been negotiating in good faith and with much patience,” Nehawu said. “Sars has stalled and negotiated in bad faith. It is for these reasons that as Nehawu, we cannot delay the struggle to better the working conditions of our members, and workers in general. As Nehawu, we shall do everything in our power to fight for these reasonable and achievable demands and rights of our members and workers at Sars.” May, 2022 strike  In May, Nehawu went on a full-blown national strike demanding a wage increase from Sars. At the time, Nehawu was demanding a 12 percent wage increase, and said they would not accept the 1.3 percent Sars was putting on the table. Demands  “As Nehawu, we have tried to engage the institution since May, 2022 and they remained stubborn with the 1.39 percent that is way below the current inflation rate of 5.9 percent.” Sars rejected the tabled demands which include the following: BUSINESS REPORT