The South African Information and Communications Technology (ICT) space saw a major shake-up last week, after mobile operator MTN South Africa announced it was in talks to buy Telkom.  Both companies said the discussions were about MTN acquiring the entire issued share capital of partially state-owned telecommunications provider, Telkom, in return for shares or a combination of cash and shares in MTN. The companies said the discussions were at an early stage and there was no certainty that the transaction would be consummated. If the deal goes through, this means MTN will have to buy out the government as it holds a 40% stake in Telkom, while the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) owns a further 14% of Telkom’s equity. The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) has come out and said it condemns any plan to privatize Telkom.  “Telkom is a state-owned enterprise (SOE) and government the shareholder currently owns a 40.5% stake in it. It is currently the country’s biggest telecommunications provider. As of 2020 it had overtaken Cell C to become the country’s 3rd largest mobile operator. We are opposed to any privatisation of state owned companies. We have consistently warned about the dangers of privatisation and the dire impact this would have on the working class and the economy,” Numsa said in a statement on Wednesday.  Numsa went on to state that Telkom has a developmental role to play in the South African economy.  “South Africa is a poor country of more than 46% unemployment. We are the most unequal country in the world. If we are to grow the economy, and the ICT sector a whole, we must influence ICT policy and we must have a state-owned telecommunications company which will implement government policy,” Numsa further said.  “If Telkom is privatised its developmental agenda will be nullified. The private sector does not care about creating access to communities and the working class. It has no interest in BBBEE and empowering communities. They care only about profits,” Numsa said.  “We have seen how the ANC-led government has ensured that privatisation of SOEs benefits those who are politically connected to the leadership. SAA in its heyday provided over 40 thousand jobs across the value chain. It contributed massively to the tourism and hospitality sector, many businesses collapsed as a result of its radical restructuring. It was sold for a mere R51 to the Takatso Consortium, in a deal which is shrouded in secrecy,” Numsa said.  The union went on to say that if this deal goes through, members of the ANC elite will benefit.  “After all, Cyril Ramaphosa was the chairperson of MTN from 2001 to 2013, before becoming president of the country. Ramaphosa has made it his mission to sell all our state assets to private capital at the expense of the working class. We have seen this at Eskom as well where energy generation is privatised through the IPP’s. This is clearly part of the ANC’s privatisation agenda,” Numsa stated.  Numsa went on to list the below reasons on why the union is against the sale of Telkom to MTN:  BUSINESS REPORT