Monkeypox - a rare viral infection related to smallpox - have been confirmed by health authorities in the United Kingdom. –  Dr Jacqueline Weyer from the Special Viral Pathogens Division at the Centre for Emerging, Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases was recently interviewed about the multi-national outbreak of #monkeypox. #KnowTheFacts(visuals courtesy @SABCNews) https://t.co/wfJZxTAi3J –  WATCH: Here’s what South Africans need to know. Cape Town - While South Africa and the rest of the world continue to make strides in recovering from the Covid-19 global pandemic, a new crisis has hit Europe in the form of monkeypox, leaving many in Africa uncertain. Read More Here –  LOOK: Monkeypox cases around the world Nearly 20 countries where monkeypox is not endemic have reported outbreaks of the viral disease, with more than 100 confirmed or suspected infections, mostly in Europe. Portugal reported 14 new confirmed cases on May 23, bringing the total to 37. Reuters Read More Here: –  #MonkeypoxUpdate: Although 15 countries have collectively reported more than 140 #monkeypox cases, our institute confirms that there are currently no cases in SA. To find out more about the global situation, symptoms and more, read here: https://t.co/liYlx6szsb pic.twitter.com/axOINogmQD #Monkeypox Anyone with unusual rashes or lesions on any part of their body should contact NHS 111 or call a sexual health service. With recent cases mainly reported in gay and bisexual men, those in this community should be particularly alert. Get the latest updates ⏬ –  EXPLAINER: How concerned should we be about monkeypox? New York: Global health officials have sounded the alarm over rising cases of monkeypox in Europe and elsewhere. The viral infection is more common to west and central Africa. Read More Here: –  No monkeypox cases detected in SA but the risk of importation is a reality, says NICD With more than 140 cases of monkeypox reported globally, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases has confirmed that there are no known cases in South Africa, however, the risk of the virus entering the country’s borders is a reality. Read More Here:  –  EXPLAINER: Why monkeypox cases are spreading in Europe, US https://t.co/UBM5qg0ltO –  JUST IN: The Foreign Press Association slams media outlets for using images of black people alongside stories of the #Monkeypox outbreak in US, UK https://t.co/iaLGA5Qzu6 –  Austria's first case of monkeypox confirmed, Vienna health authority says Vienna - Austria's first case of monkeypox has been confirmed, Vienna's health authority said on Sunday after reporting the case as suspected. "Suspected case of pox viruses confirmed," the health authority said on Twitter Reuters –  US president Joe Biden says 'everybody' should be concerned about monkeypox outbreak The monkeypox outbreak is something "everybody should be concerned about," U.S. President Joe Biden said on Sunday, adding that U.S. health officials are looking into possible treatments and vaccines. "We’re working on it hard to figure out what we do," Biden told reporters at an air base in South Korea before departing on Air Force One for Japan. Reuters –  Just to be clear... One case of "MonkeyPox" was found in Massachusetts this week... In less than 48 hours the United States Government had purchased 13 million MonkeyPox vaccines for $119 million. A day later, Pfizer received FDA approval for a New Monkey Pox Vaccine.. –  Monkeypox-infected people required to isolate for 3 Weeks in Belgium Monkeypox-infected people required to isolate for 3 Weeks in Belgium Belgium currently requires monkeypox-infected individuals to be quarantined for 21 days, media report. Since the monkeypox virus has a rather long incubation period, infected people need to be isolated for three weeks, La Libre daily said on Sunday citing Belgian authorities. Nonetheless, those who have been in contact with the infected person are not required to self-isolate and only need to watch their health condition closely, the newspaper specified. Belgium currently has four confirmed cases of monkeypox — all of the infected people had attended the same event. Sputnik News –