Durban - Gauteng is a great region to kickstart your career with an internship. With some of the country's biggest companies, the province offers a lot of opportunities.  Here are seven internships to apply for in Gauteng: 1. City of Joburg Transport internship Location: Johannesburg  Duration: 18 months Requirements: Bachelor’s degree in Finance or equivalent SAQA registered qualification. Application deadline: June 2, 2022. Apply here. 2. Business Analysis internship Company: FTI Consulting, INC Location: Johannesburg Requirements: Undergraduate degree in Business, Computer Science, Economics, Engineering, Finance, Management, Strategy, Analytics or a related field.  Apply here.  3. Education internship Organisation: Mitra Academy Location: Johannesburg Stipend: R50 an hour Requirements: Currently enrolled in a tertiary institution. Willingness to try new teaching methods and to receive criticism from Academic Team. Comfortable in a start-up setting, where systems and procedures are in flux. Apply here.  4. Digital communication internship Organisation: Medecins Sans Frontieres SA Location: Johannesburg Duration: 12 months Requirements: Qualification in Communications, Marketing, Public Relations, or similar field. Good working knowledge of social media platforms, including Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and LinkedIn. Experience in managing social media accounts and interest in developing online communication and marketing tactics. Application deadline:  May 26, 2022 Apply here. 5. Internal Auditing internships (x2) Company: Mintek  Location: Randburg Duration: 12 months Requirements:  Bachelor’s or Honour’s degree in internal Auditing. Application deadline:  May 31, 2022 Apply here.  6. HR internship Company: The Building Company Location: Honeydew Requirements: Graduates must have qualified in the past 12 to 24 months with a Degree or B.Tech in the Human Resources field. Apply here. 7. System Support internship Company: Syntell Pty Ltd Location: Centurion Stipend: R6 000 to  R7 500 a month Duration: 12 months Requirements: National Diploma in Information Technology/ information systems or related qualification. A minimum of one to two years’ experience in system support.  Apply here.  IOL Business